  PspA inhibits PspF activity by direct interaction of the AAA + transcription activation domain of PspF  . 
Although PspA appears to regulate transcription of the psp regulon , it does not bind to DNA , but it is necessary for repressing this regulon . 
PspA appears to bind to the W56 loop of PspF , which is a region that contains residues 50-62 . 
This loop contains a group of three amino acids , called the YLW patch , that serve as a docking site for PspA and for ATP hydrolytic activity  . 
 The PspF AAA + domain interacts with σ54 in the presence of a compound that mimics the transition state of ATP hydrolysis . 
The AAA + domain may directly contact DNA while promoting open complex formation . 
Detailed analysis of the role of the C7 and the C3 regions of PspF has been presented with respect to ATP hydrolysis , protein oligomerization , binding to the σ54 holoenzyme , and transcription activation  . 
 PspF is composed of two domains : the N-terminal catalytic domain , common to members of the AAA + protein family -LRB- ATPase associated with various cellular activities -RRB- , and a C-terminal helix-turn-helix DNA-binding domain . 
PspF does not contain a regulatory domain typical for other bEBP proteins ; instead , its activity is negatively controlled by PspA acting in trans . 
The mechano-chemical coupling in bEBPs requires distinct activities of the AAA + subunits . 
The catalytic AAA + domain is necessary and sufficient to activate σ54 transcription in vivo and in vitro . 
Hexamerization is required for this function and does not require ATP , DNA , or the DNA-binding domain . 
When assembled into a ring , the AAA + domain uses the energy from ATP binding , hydrolysis , and product release to remodel the σ54-RNA polymerase holoenzyme so that it can transition from the closed to the open complex . 
The AAA + domain contains all conserved motifs of the AAA + family , including Walkers A and B for ATP binding and hydrolysis , and the second region of homology -LRB- SRH -RRB- , which contains arginine fingers for intersubunit catalysis . 
As a member of the bEBP family it carries two additional sequence insertions : the L1 loop containing the GAFTGA motif and the L2 loop -LRB- also termed the pre-SIi loop -RRB- . 
The L1 loop is known to interact with σ54 , presumably with region I of σ54 . 
Zhang et al. -LRB- 2012 -RRB- showed that L1 is multifunctional , since it interacts with three elements important for isomerization from RPc to RPo -LRB- the RNAP closed and open complexes , respectively -RRB- . 
On one hand , L1 contacts the DNA nontemplate strand immediately upstream of the -24 promoter element , and on other hand , it contacts two PspF L1-binding sites , residues 18 to 25 and 33 to 39 , within σ54 RI . 
The GAFTGA motif is thought to communicate changes associated with ATP hydrolysis , leading to conformational rearrangements in the RNA polymerase closed complex and thereby promoting open complex formation . 
The L2 loop is thought to coordinate movement of the L1 loop  . 
